Title: Fanar-Sadiq: A Multi-Agent Architecture for Grounded Islamic QA

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.08501v2

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2026 00:58:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Fanar-Sadiq: A Multi-Agent Architecture for Grounded Islamic QA 

Ummar Abbas, Mourad Ouzzani, Mohamed Y. Eltabakh, Omar Sinan, Gagan Bhatia, Hamdy Mubarak, Majd Hawasly, Mohammed Qusay Hashim, Kareem Darwish, Firoj Alam 

Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU, Qatar 

{uabbas, mouzzani, meltabakh, osinan, hmubarak, mhawasly}@hbku.edu.qa {mohashim, kadarwish, fialam}@hbku.edu.qa, gbhatia@qcri.org 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) can answer re-ligious knowledge queries fluently, yet they of-ten hallucinate and misattribute sources, which is especially consequential in Islamic settings where users expect grounding in canonical texts (Qur’an and Hadith) and jurispruden-tial (fiqh) nuance. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration (RAG) reduces some of these limi-tations by grounding generation in external evidence. However, a single “retrieve-then-generate” pipeline is limited to deal with the diversity of Islamic queries. Users may re-quest verbatim scripture, fatwa-style guidance with citations or rule-constrained computations such as zakat and inheritance that require strict arithmetic and legal invariants. In this work, we present a bilingual (Arabic/English) multi-agent Islamic assistant, called “Fanar-Sadiq” ,which is a core component of the Fanar AI platform. Fanar-Sadiq routes Islamic-related queries to specialized modules within an agen-tic, tool-using architecture. The system sup-ports intent-aware routing, retrieval-grounded fiqh answers with deterministic citation nor-malization and verification traces, exact verse lookup with quotation validation, and determin-istic calculators for Sunni zakat and inheritance with madhhab-sensitive branching. We evalu-ate the complete end-to-end system on public Islamic QA benchmarks and demonstrate ef-fectiveness and efficiency. Our system is cur-rently publicly and freely accessible through API and a Web application, and has been ac-cessed ≈1.9M times in less than a year. 1

1 Introduction 

Recent advances in large language models have enabled conversational assistants that can han-dle knowledge-intensive question answering (QA) across many domains. Despite these gains, hal-lucination and source-attribution errors remain 

> 1https://api.fanar.qa/docs

common, particularly when users expect answers grounded in authoritative references rather than plausible-sounding narrative. In religious applica-tions, these failures carry higher stakes. Fabricating a Quranic verse, misattributing a Hadith, or present-ing a jurisprudential position subject to scholarly disagreement without stating relevant conditions can mislead users. This motivates Islamic QA sys-tems that not only answer correctly, but also pro-vide clear grounding, stable citations, and explicit handling of cases where the system should abstain or surface scholarly disagreement. The community has begun formalizing these reliability requirements through benchmarks and shared tasks. QuranQA (Malhas et al., 2023) has es-tablished standardized evaluation for Quranic pas-sage retrieval and reading comprehension. Islam-icEval (Mubarak et al., 2025) further emphasizes grounded Quran/Hadith QA and includes tasks for detecting and correcting Quranic hallucinations, reflecting real user risks when quotations are fab-ricated or corrupted. For structured religious rea-soning, QIAS focuses on Islamic inheritance (aka faraid in Islamic Jurisprudence), a domain where correct answers require rule-based computation and legal constraints (Bouchekif et al., 2025a). Islamic QA systems should (i) ground responses in canonical sources, (ii) provide transparent ci-tations, and (iii) properly handle domain-specific reasoning tasks that exceed the reliability of free-form generation. RAG combines parametric gen-eration with non-parametric retrieval to ground responses in external documents (Lewis et al., 2020); dense retrievers such as DPR (Karpukhin et al., 2020) and generative readers such as Fusion-in-Decoder (FiD) (Izacard and Grave, 2021) (as well as retrieval-in-the-loop models such as RETRO (Borgeaud et al., 2022) and Atlas (Izacard et al., 2023)) show retrieval can improve factual QA and knowledge updating. Nevertheless, a fixed retrieve-then-generate pipeline is often not a good 1

> arXiv:2603.08501v2 [cs.CL] 10 Mar 2026 Figure 1: Illustrative end-to-end examples showing intent routing to specialized tools, traceable citations for fiqh QA, exact Quranic verse handling, deterministic zakat computation, and explicit madhhab-sensitive branching for disputed inheritance cases. Citation tags [C*] denote normalized evidence spans: [Q*] denotes verse-level citations.

match for real-world Islamic queries; some are best satisfied by exact lookup , e.g., “What does verse 2:255 say?”, others require rule-constrained com-putation , e.g., zakat, inheritance, and others require 

jurisprudential reasoning with evidence presenta-tion , e.g., fatwa-style questions with stated assump-tions, conditions, and madhhab sensitivity. Thus, treating heterogeneous intents uniformly can de-grade correctness and user experience. Tool-using approaches suggest a path beyond rigid pipelines. ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) interleaves reasoning with actions for iterative retrieval/verification, while Toolformer (Schick et al., 2023) shows models can learn when to call tools, e.g., calculators, moti-vating an architecture that selects among multiple execution modes based on query intent rather than forcing every question through the same pipeline. In this paper, we present Fanar-Sadiq a bilin-gual multi-agent Islamic QA system built around an agentic, multi-tool architecture (see Figure 2). It is explicitly designed for the heterogeneity em-phasized by contemporary Islamic QA benchmarks. At a high level, the system (a ) classifies incoming queries into fine-grained Islamic intent types (few examples are provided in Figure 1), (b) routes each query to an appropriate specialized module, and 

(c) enforces transparency and reliability via citation tracking and post-generation verification. Fanar-Sadiq is the Islamic AI assistant within the Fanar AI platform (Team et al., 2025). 2

The contributions of this work include: • A multi-agent architecture for Islamic QA that goes beyond fixed RAG by routing queries to specialized tools and integrating evidence track-ing and verification. 

> 2https://fanar.qa/

• A comprehensive evaluation spanning multiple public benchmarks covering both generative and multiple-choice Islamic QA. • Our findings show that tool- and evidence-routed execution improves faithfulness, vital for Islamic QA, while remaining competitive on broader Islamic knowledge benchmarks. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Multi-Agent Tool-Using QA Systems 

While RAG has established itself as the de facto standard for knowledge-intensive NLP, mitigat-ing hallucination via dense retrieval mechanisms (Borgeaud et al., 2022), standard “retrieve-then-generate” pipelines often struggle with heteroge-neous user intents that demand multi-step reason-ing or precise computation rather than mere se-mantic similarity (Team et al., 2025; Bragg et al., 2025). To address these structural limitations, the field has pivoted toward “Agentic RAG” and tool-augmented models (Comanici et al., 2025; Bhatia et al., 2026), where frameworks like ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) enable models to interleave reasoning traces with external API calls to iteratively refine answers. This paradigm shift is particularly criti-cal for domain-specific applications. Recent work demonstrates that decomposing complex queries, such as mathematical reasoning (Shao et al., 2024) or legal judgment (Bahaj and Ghogho, 2025), into modular subtasks handled by specialised agents sig-nificantly outperforms monolithic generation. Our proposed architecture adopts this methodology to handle the distinct computational logic required for jurisprudential calculations versus textual re-trieval, aligning with recent findings that agentic workflows yield the largest gains in faithfulness for 2complex Islamic QA (Bhatia et al., 2026). 

2.2 Islamic RAG Assistants 

The deployment of LLMs in the Islamic domain is constrained by the critical necessity of doctri-nal integrity, where hallucination risks (Alansari and Luqman, 2025) and “sacred versus synthetic” attribution failures (Atif et al., 2025) differ funda-mentally from open-domain issues. Consequently, recent shared tasks such as QuranQA (Malhas et al., 2023) and IslamicEval 2025 (Mubarak et al., 2025) have formalized benchmarks for passage re-trieval and hallucination detection. Initiatives like QIAS 2025 (Bouchekif et al., 2025a) and Hajj-FQA (Aleid and Azmi, 2025) explicitly target structured reasoning in inheritance and ritual jurisprudence. Beyond static benchmarks, architectural innova-tions are increasingly integrating reliability con-trols. Systems like AFTINA (Mohammed et al., 2025) and FARSIQA (Asl and Bidgoli, 2025) em-ploy RAG-based reranking and iterative refinement to ground Fatwa answers, while others leverage morphological constraints (Akra et al., 2025) and cross-lingual augmentation (Oshallah et al., 2025) to ensure recitation accuracy. Most relevant to our approach, (Bhatia et al., 2026) introduced an agen-tic framework that utilizes structured tool calls for verse-level verification, demonstrating that iterative evidence seeking significantly reduces hallucina-tion compared to standard RAG. Our work syn-thesizes these approaches by embedding verified retrieval tools within an multi-agent architecture, addressing the “faithfulness gap” (Mushtaq et al., 2025) that generic models like GPT or Jais (Sen-gupta et al., 2023) often exhibit when handling sensitive scripture. 

3 System Architecture 

In Figure 2, we present our multi-agent end-to-end architecture . The system is designed for hetero-geneous Islamic QA, spanning rule-heavy obliga-tions best handled with symbolic computation and canonical text retrieval where verbatim accuracy is essential. User queries fall into three broad classes: 

(i) text-grounded questions (Quran/Hadith/fiqh/gen-eral Islamic knowledge), (ii) rule- and arithmetic-constrained questions (zakat and inheritance), and 

(iii) symbolic time/geo questions (Hijri calendar and prayer times). Treating all of these intents as a single “retrieve-then-generate” task leads to pre-dictable failure modes, including misquoted verses,                                                         

> Work Calc. Quran NL2SQL Evidence Tools Ours (Fig. 2) ✓✓✓✓✓
> Karpas et al. (2022) (MRKL) ✗✗✗✓✓
> Yao et al. (2023) (ReAct) ✗✗✗✓✓
> Schick et al. (2023) (Toolformer) ✗✗✗✓✓
> Asai et al. (2024) (Self-RAG) ✗✗✗✓✗
> Yan et al. (2024) (CRAG) ✗✗✗✓✗
> Al-Azani et al. (2025) ✗✓✗✓✗
> Bhatia et al. (2026) ✗✓✗✓✓
> Omayrah et al. (2025) ✗✓✗✓✗
> AL-Smadi (2025) ✗✗✗✓✗
> Alowaidi (2025) ✗✗✗✓✗

Table 1: Comparison against widely-recognized tool/a-gent/RAG architectures. Calc. refers to explicit rule engines. Quran denotes verse-anchored retrieval dis-tinct from generic document search. 

weak or missing sourcing for jurisprudential claims, and numerically inconsistent zakat or inheritance outputs. To contextualize these design choices, in Table 1, we compare our system with prior agentic and Islamic QA systems, highlighting why Islamic QA benefits from specialized modules for compu-tation and scripture handling. Most existing Islamic QA systems implement a text-only retrieval–generation workflow, some-times enhanced with reranking (e.g., AFTINA) or iterative retrieval refinement (e.g., FARSIQA) (Mo-hammed et al., 2025; Asl and Bidgoli, 2025). Other systems, such as MufassirQAS, similarly focus on vector-database RAG with transparent citations (Alan et al.). Agentic RAG approaches introduce structured tool calls for iterative evidence seeking and answer revision, improving generative faithful-ness. However, they primarily extend retrieval be-havior rather than integrating deterministic jurispru-dential calculators and symbolic geo-temporal tools under a unified router (Bhatia et al., 2026). In con-trast, our multi-agent architecture routes each query to a heterogeneous tool suite, including de-terministic zakat and inheritance calculators (Fig-ure 3), canonical verse lookup, and rule-based cal-endar and prayer-time computation. We further apply citation normalization and post-generation verification to reduce Quran/Hadith misquotation and support rule-intensive inheritance reasoning. In our multi-agent system, we use Fanar (Team et al., 2025) as the LLM agent. 

3.1 Hybrid Query Classifier 

As shown in Figure 2, we implement a hybrid rout-ing classifier to predict the query type and select the execution route as the system entry point. The primary classifier is an LLM prompted to output an intent label, a confidence score, a short ratio-nale, optional decomposition subquestions, and a retrieval flag indicating whether evidence retrieval 3Figure 2: Our multi-agent architecture . A hybrid query classifier selects among (i) tool calls, (ii) deterministic calculation, (iii) document-grounded retrieval QA, and (iv) Quranic retrieval routes, before assembling the final response with references. 

is required. We define nine intent classes aligned with the system tools: (i) fiqh rulings, (ii) Qur’an retrieval, (iii) general Islamic knowledge, (iv) greet-ings/chitchat, (v) zakat calculation, (vi) inheritance calculation, (vii) du’a lookup, (viii) Islamic calen-dar, and (ix) prayer times. Our nine intent classes are motivated by es-tablished query-intent and dialogue-act views that separate (a) social acts (e.g., greetings), (b) information-seeking retrieval (e.g., Quran text and dua lookup), and (c) transactional/computational requests (e.g., zakat, inheritance, calendar, and prayer-time queries), where each intent implies a different execution strategy and error profile (Broder, 2002). We further ground the schema in canonical subdomains of Islamic knowledge: jurisprudential queries require fiqh-oriented reason-ing (Hallaq, 2009), while zakat and inheritance fol-low structured rule systems amenable to calculator-style tools (al Qaradawi, 2000). Calendar conver-sion and prayer-time/Qibla requests are naturally modeled as spatiotemporal computations (Reingold and Dershowitz, 2018). We developed a manually annotated dataset of 700 queries to evaluate the hybrid classifier, which achieves 90.1% accuracy (Table 2). More details on dataset development are provided in Section 3.1.1. 

Primary (LLM) classifier. The LLM operates at zero temperature and outputs strictly format-ted JSON containing: intent label, language (Arabic/English), confidence in [0 , 1] , brief ra-tionale, optional decomposition, and a boolean 

requires_retrieval flag. We strip common model artifacts and extract JSON from markdown code blocks if necessary. 

Fallback (prototype) classifier. To improve rout-ing robustness under low-confidence predictions (below 0.5), malformed outputs, or invocation fail-ures, we implement a prototype-based fallback. Specifically, we compute cosine similarity against precomputed intent-language prototype embed-dings and select the maximum-similarity class. We derive fallback confidence from the margin be-tween the top two classes: confidence = sim 1 − sim 2

2 + 0 .5, (1) mapping separations into a [0 , 1] range. Prototype embeddings are precomputed offline using Qwen3-Embedding-4B and cached in memory. 

3.1.1 Evaluation of the Hybrid Query Classifier 

To evaluate quality of the hybrid query classifier ,we developed an intent-labeled dataset of 705 real user queries sampled from the system’s chat in-terface. Queries were anonymized and filtered to remove personally identifying information prior to annotation. A pool of six annotators labeled each query into one of the nine intent categories, with three independent labels collected per query. The final label was determined by majority vote; instances without majority agreement were dis-carded. Inter-annotator agreement (Fleiss’ κ) is 0.76 across the three annotations. On the 700 queries with majority labels, our hybrid classifier achieves 90.1% accuracy, while zero-shot GPT-5 and Gemini achieve 89.3% and 89.7% accuracy, respectively (Table 2). 4Classifier Accuracy (%)    

> Ours (Hybrid) 90.1 GPT-5 (zero-shot) 89.3 Gemini (zero-shot) 89.7
> Table 2: Hybrid query classifier classification accuracy.

3.2 Tool Calls 

Queries requiring utility lookups are routed to the 

Tool Action Agent , which orchestrates deterministic modules. A lightweight Greeting Tool handles cul-turally appropriate greetings and pleasantries. The 

Islamic Calendar tool performs rule-based time reasoning for Hijri date queries, Gregorian–Hijri conversion, and event lookups using multilingual intent cues, hijri-converter conversions, and a curated bilingual event ontology with explicit year-rollover logic. The Prayer Times and Qibla tool resolves locations to coordinates via a curated city database with a rate-limited geocoding fallback, computes prayer timetables using pyIslam with method parameters, and computes great-circle dis-tance and bearing to Makkah for Qibla requests while logging trace metadata for interpretability. Finally, the Dua Lookup tool provides high-recall, deterministic retrieval by selecting top-k occasions via semantic search over precomputed embeddings, then using a lightweight LLM selector to map the best match to canonical page_title keys, return-ing the supplication verbatim (Arabic, translation, and reference) from a structured store to avoid rewriting. 

3.2.1 Greeting Tool 

The greeting tool handles simple greetings and pleasantries with culturally appropriate Islamic re-sponses. Language detection operates on Arabic character ratio, classifying text as Arabic when more than 30% of characters fall in Unicode Arabic blocks (U+0600–U+06FF). For Arabic queries, the system responds in Modern Standard Arabic with formal register. For English queries, responses in-clude transliterated Arabic phrases followed by an offer to assist with Islamic knowledge. Responses are constrained to one or two sentences for brevity, with deterministic fallbacks if invocation fails. 

3.2.2 Islamic Calendar Tool 

The Islamic calendar tool handles Hijri date queries, conversions, and Islamic event lookups through deterministic rule-based processing. Query type detection operates via multilingual keyword match-ing to classify inputs into five subtypes: current Hijri date, Gregorian-to-Hijri conversion, Hijri-to-Gregorian conversion, specific Islamic event dates, and upcoming events listing. Date conversions rely on the hijri-converter library (Umm al-Qura), and responses include explicit disclaimers regard-ing local moon-sighting variations. Event resolu-tion uses a curated bilingual ontology (20+ events) with explicit year-rollover logic. 

3.2.3 Prayer Times and Qibla Tool 

This tool computes Islamic prayer times and Qibla direction using astronomical calculations based on geographic coordinates. Location resolution em-ploys a four-stage pipeline: curated city database lookup, LLM-based extraction/transliteration, rate-limited geocoding fallback, then default coordi-nates with an explicit disclaimer if resolution fails. Prayer time calculation uses pyIslam with method parameters (Table 3). Qibla direction is computed as the great-circle bearing to the Kaaba in Makkah (21.4225 ◦N, 39.8262 ◦E): 

θ = arctan 

 sin(∆ λ)cos( ϕ1) tan( ϕ2) − sin( ϕ1) cos(∆ λ)



,

(2) where (ϕ1, λ 1) are user coordinates, (ϕ2, λ 2) are Makkah coordinates, and ∆λ = λ2 − λ1. The bearing is converted to a compass heading (0–360 ◦)and accompanied by the great-circle distance to Makkah.           

> Method Fajr Angle Isha Angle
> Muslim World League 18 ◦17 ◦
> Egyptian Authority 19.5 ◦17.5 ◦
> Umm al-Qura (Makkah) 18.5 ◦90 min after Maghrib Islamic Society of North America 15 ◦15 ◦
> Table 3: Prayer time calculation methods and their an-gular parameters.

3.2.4 Dua Lookup Tool 

The Dua lookup tool provides verbatim retrieval of authenticated Islamic supplications from curated sources, designed to prevent generative hallucina-tion. Stage 1 ranks precomputed occasion embed-dings (Qwen3-Embedding-4B) by cosine similarity and keeps the top-k candidates (default k = 5 )above a minimum threshold (0.2). Stage 2 uses a lightweight LLM selector to output candidate in-dices, which are deterministically mapped to canon-ical page_title keys. The tool returns the sup-plication verbatim (diacritized Arabic, translation, 5Algorithm 1 Zakat Calculation 

Input: Assets A, Liabilities L, Prices P 

> 1:

Ngold ← 85 × Pgold/gram  

> 2:

Nsilver ← 595 × Psilver/gram  

> 3:

N ← min( Ngold , N silver ) 

> 4:

Amonetary ← Acash +( Agold ×Pgold )+( Asilver ×

Psilver ) + Abusiness + Astocks  

> 5:

Anet ← Amonetary − Ldebts  

> 6:

if Anet ≥ N then  

> 7:

Zmonetary ← 0.025 × Anet  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

Zmonetary ← 0 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

Zagriculture ← AgricultureZakat (Aproduce ) 

> 12:

Zlivestock ← LivestockZakat (Alivestock ) 

> 13:

Z ← Zmonetary + Zagriculture + Zlivestock 

Output: Z with category breakdown and warn-ings and reference URL) from a structured store to pre-serve authenticity. 

3.3 Calculation Pipeline (Deterministic) 

Rule-heavy financial and legal questions are routed to the Calculation Pipeline to eliminate arithmetic drift and enforce jurisprudential constraints. 

3.3.1 Zakat Calculator 

Zakat is a Shariah-mandated almsgiving governed by established juristic rules (Al-Qaradawi, 1999). Our Zakat agent extracts structured parameters such as asset classes, amounts, and debts, then passes them to a deterministic module. The cal-culator computes the nisab or minimum threshold based on precious-metal prices: Nisab = min(85 g×Pgold/gram , 595 g×Psilver/gram ).

(3) For agriculture, differentiated rates are applied based on irrigation methods. For livestock, Hadith-based schedules are used for camels, cattle, and sheep. For assets, rates are applied to cash, gold, business assets, and investments after deducting el-igible debts. The output is a structured breakdown of inputs, deductions, and totals, formatted into a user-facing explanation with citations. 

3.3.2 Inheritance Calculator 

The inheritance calculator (Figure 3) is a determin-istic Sunni module that computes estate distribu-tion while explicitly handling madhhab-specific dif-ferences. The workflow proceeds in three phases. First, fixed shares ( fard ) are assigned to eligible heirs after validating kinship and removing imped-iments. Second, the remaining estate is allocated via a priority chain of paternal-line relatives known as residuaries ( ‘asaba ). Third, the module enforces arithmetic consistency by applying ‘awl (propor-tional reduction) if shares exceed the estate, or radd 

(return of remainder) if a surplus exists. Crucially, jurisprudentially disputed cases trigger a policy se-lector that returns parallel distributions (e.g., Hanafi vs. Jumhur) rather than a single collapsed ruling. 

Figure 3: Inheritance calculation workflow. Disputed cases return parallel outcomes instead of collapsing to a single ruling.                   

> Heir Conditions Share
> Husband No children 1/2 Husband Has children 1/4 Wife No children 1/4 Wife Has children 1/8 Father Has children/grandchildren 1/6 Mother Has children/grandchildren 1/6 Daughter (sole) No sons 1/2 Daughters ( ≥2) No sons 2/3

Table 4: Representative fixed share (Fard) allocations from Quranic specifications. 

3.4 Knowledge Retrieval Pipeline 

Informational queries are routed to retrieval-augmented QA workflows that instantiate usul al-fiqh reasoning patterns through evidence linkage. 

3.4.1 Fiqh Rulings 

This module uses a Fiqh Documents Retriever fol-lowed by a reasoning agent. The agent is prompted to state ruling scope and assumptions, separate rul-ings from evidence, and assign deterministic cita-tion tags to evidence spans (e.g., [CITE:N] ). The system supports retrieval-time source normaliza-tion to ensure every claim maps to a stable source text. If a ruling relies on exact scriptural wording, the agent can invoke the Quranic tool to prevent paraphrase drift. 63.4.2 General Islamic Understanding 

For general inquiries, the system retrieves can-didate documents and normalizes them into a bounded context. An Islamic Understanding Agent 

then generates a response that is strictly grounded in the retrieved references to minimize hallucina-tions. 

3.4.3 Document Retriever and Embeddings 

The retriever performs semantic search over 

500 ,000+ documents from Quran, major Hadith collections, classical fiqh texts, contemporary fat-was, Islamic history, and scholarly articles. Queries are embedded using Qwen3-Embedding-4B and searched via cosine similarity in a vector database (e.g., Milvus/Chroma with HNSW), with top-k re-trieval (default 12), minimum similarity threshold-ing, optional cross-encoder reranking, source diver-sity enforcement, and metadata filtering. Citation normalization deduplicates and formats sources for display. 

3.5 Quranic Retrieval Pipeline 3.5.1 Quran Query Classifier 

Quran-related queries are handled by a dedicated routing module that predicts one of four subtypes: 

specific verse , full surah , statistics , or interpreta-tion . The primary classifier is an LLM constrained to this closed label set; if the output is invalid or non-conforming, the system falls back to an embedding-based classifier over exemplars to en-sure stable routing under malformed outputs or low confidence. The predicted subtype selects a fixed execution route and downstream response for-matting, and the system logs structured metadata (predicted subtype, selected path, invoked tools) for traceability. 

3.5.2 Quran Interpretation and Specific Verse Retrieval 

For specific verse requests (explicit surah:ayah ref-erences, named surahs, or short quotations), the sys-tem invokes a Quran retrieval tool that parses the reference and returns the canonical ayah text verba-tim, degrading to surah-level lookup if only partial information is provided or parsing fails. For in-terpretation queries, the system performs retrieval of relevant verses and supporting documents, then uses a constrained Quran Interpretation Agent to produce an explanatory response grounded in the retrieved evidence, attaching verse-level citations 

Algorithm 2 Quran Verse Retrieval 

Input: Query q (reference string)  

> 1:

(s, a start , a end ) ← ParseReference (q) 

> 2:

snum ← ResolveSurah (s) 

> 3:

if snum = null OR astart , a end invalid then Output: Error with guidance  

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

V ← QueryDatabase (snum , a start , a end ) 

> 6:

url ← BuildCitationURL (snum , a start , a end )

Output: FormatResponse (V, url )

when references can be resolved to avoid para-phrase drift and ungrounded exegesis. 

3.5.3 Quran Retrieval Tool 

The Quran retrieval tool provides verbatim verse lookup with support for numeric ( 2:275 ), named (Al-Baqarah:275 ), verbose ( Surah 2 Verse 275 ), and fuzzy formats. Surah name resolution uses exact lookup against the 114 canonical names with case-insensitive matching and prefix strip-ping; otherwise it applies fuzzy matching (Lev-enshtein distance and embedding similarity) above a 0.6 confidence threshold. The backing SQLite database stores Uthmanic Arabic with diacritics, simplified Arabic for search, translation, and struc-tural metadata. Algorithm 2 summarizes the proce-dure and builds canonical citation URLs following 

https://quran.com/<surah>/<ayah> .

3.5.4 NL2SQL for Full Surah and Statistics Queries 

Requests requiring long contiguous text or exact counting are routed to a NL2SQL module to avoid truncation, hallucination, and arithmetic errors. For 

full surah queries, the system retrieves all verses in canonical order directly from the verse table. For statistics queries (verse counts, word frequen-cies, surah metadata, structural filters), the system translates natural language to SQL, validates it, and safely executes it over the structured Quran database, guaranteeing numerically exact outputs. 

Training and evaluation. The specialized NL2SQL model is trained on 48k template-generated (NL, SQL) pairs and fine-tuned using LoRA SFT on Qwen/Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 .Evaluation uses denotational correctness: predicted and gold SQL are executed on the same SQLite database, requiring exact equality of results (ex-act numeric match for scalars; tuple equality for 7CREATE TABLE Quran ( ID INTEGER PRIMARY KEY, Surah INTEGER, -- Surah number (1-114) Ayah INTEGER, -- Ayah within surah AyahText TEXT, -- Arabic (Uthmanic) SimpleText TEXT, -- No diacritics Translation TEXT, -- English Juz INTEGER, -- Division (1-30) Revelation TEXT -- 'Meccan '/'Medinan '

> );

Listing 1: Quran database schema                                                

> Fanar NL2SQL Task NCorrect Wrong Total Acc Correct Wrong Total Acc Analytical/Retrieval 0 39 23 62 62.90 62 062 100.00 Analytical/Retrieval 1 50 12 62 80.65 62 062 100.00 Analytical/Retrieval 5 59 362 95.16 62 062 100.00 Counting 038 36 74 51.35 57 17 74 77.03 Counting 159 15 74 79.73 66 874 89.19 Counting 562 12 74 83.78 70 474 94.59

Table 5: Execution-based benchmark accuracy (%) com-paring Fanar vs. the specialized NL2SQL model on queries sampled from usage logs. Totals: analytical/re-trieval n = 62 , counting n = 74 .

row-valued outputs). Table 5 reports benchmark re-sults on analytical/retrieval ( n = 62 ) and counting (n = 74 ) query sets sampled from usage logs. 

3.6 Response Assembly 

All pipelines return a standardized output ob-ject with the natural language answer and struc-tured metadata. A final Response Assembler 

merges these results, adds a References block with citations and URLs, and logs execution traces for validation and debugging. System behaviour is controlled by a three-tier config-uration hierarchy (database JSON → environ-ment variables → hardcoded defaults). Key parameters include generation temperatures and output budgets per module: the Greeting tool uses greeting.temperature (default 0.2) and 

greeting.max_tokens (default 256); general an-swering uses general.temperature (default 0.1); the fiqh reasoning agent uses fiqh.temperature 

(default 0.1) and fiqh.max_tokens (default 4500); and the NL2SQL component uses 

nl2sql.temperature (default 0.1). Retrieval breadth is controlled by max_sources (default 12). Unless overridden, temperatures are constrained to 0.0–1.0 (0.0–0.5 for nl2sql.temperature ), 

greeting.max_tokens ranges from 50–1000, 

fiqh.max_tokens ranges from 2000–12000, and 

max_sources ranges from 5–50. 

4 Evaluation 

We evaluate our system end-to-end and com-pare it against strong proprietary and open-source baselines. Proprietary baselines include OpenAI models (GPT-4.1 and GPT-5) (OpenAI, 2023) and Google Gemini models (Gemini-3-Flash and Gemini-3-Pro) (Comanici et al., 2025). Open-source baselines include ALLaM-7B (Bari et al., 2025) and Fanar-2-27B (Team et al., 2025). Below, we briefly discuss benchmarking datasets. 

Benchmarking datasets. We evaluate our sys-tem on a suite of benchmarks spanning (i) open-ended, faithfulness-critical Islamic QA and fatwa-style generation, and (ii) multiple-choice Islamic knowledge and rule-constrained legal reasoning. A summary of the datasets is provided in Table 6. The open-ended benchmarks include Islamic-FaithQA, which consists of 3,810 bilingual (Ara-bic/English) examples with a single-gold atomic 

reference answer, designed to surface real-world failure modes in generative Islamic QA, includ-ing free-form hallucination and appropriate ab-stention when evidence is missing (Bhatia et al., 2026), and FatwaQA, an Arabic benchmark of 

2,000 fatwa-style QA pairs focused on Islamic jurisprudence and finance categories (e.g., za-kat, riba, murabaha, gharar, waqf, ijara, maysir, musharaka, mudharaba, takaful, sukuk ) (Sahm-Benchmark, 2025). Its open-ended format encour-ages detailed, evidence-backed responses, making it suitable for assessing end-to-end reliability and citation-faithfulness under realistic prompts. For rule-based computation, legal reasoning, and value-consistent decision making, we use three MCQ benchmarks. QIAS 2025 (Islamic Inheri-tance Reasoning) benchmarks hard-constraint fiqh reasoning (Bouchekif et al., 2025b), a primarily Arabic inheritance reasoning task where models must select the correct option (letter-only) corre-sponding to the gold inheritance distribution; we report exact-match accuracy over the chosen option. PalmX 2025 (Islamic Culture Subtask) is a shared-task benchmark of 1,000 Arabic (MSA) multiple-choice questions covering Islamic culture and prac-tices (Alwajih et al., 2025). Finally, IslamTrust measures alignment with consensus-based Islamic ethical principles using a bilingual (Ar/En) MCQ benchmark of 406 items (Lahmar et al., 2025). 

Evaluation method. For the open-ended datasets 8Dataset (Ref.) Format Lang Size Metric(s)                     

> PalmX (Alwajih et al., 2025) MCQ ar 1,000 Acc QIAS (T1) (Bouchekif et al., 2025b) MCQ ar 1,000 Acc IslamTrust (Lahmar et al., 2025) MCQ ar+en 406 Acc IslamicFaithQA (Bhatia et al., 2026) GenQA ar+en 3,810 Acc (LLM-J) FatwaQA (SahmBenchmark, 2025) GenQA ar 2,000 Acc (LLM-J)

Table 6: Evaluation datasets used in this work. Lang: 

ar =Arabic, en =English. GenQA: generative question answering. LLM-J: LLM-judge.                                                  

> Dataset GPT-4.1 GPT-5 G3-F G3-P ALLaM Fanar Ours
> PalmX 52.9 82.3 81.2 84.4 45.5 72.5 85.5
> QIAS T1 89.2 93.0 91.5 94.5 52.4 63.5 72.2 IslamTrust 94.7 95.2 94.8 95.6 57.4 83.2 94.2 IslamicFaithQA 41.4 51.2 53.4 56.6 42.7 48.2 65.4
> FatwaQA 32.3 63.6 54.6 67.0 31.5 44.5 65.1 Average 62.1 77.1 75.1 79.6 45.9 62.4 76.5

Table 7: Accuracy (%) across benchmarks. G3-F: Gemini-3-Flash, G3-P: Gemini-3-Pro. 

(IslamicFaithQA and Fatwa QA), we adopt an LLM-as-a-judge protocol following the S IMPLE QA (Haas et al., 2025): given the question, the sys-tem response, and the reference answer (and ev-idence when available), a judge LLM (GPT-4.1) assigns a discrete verdict: correct , incorrect or 

not attempted (Evaluation prompt can be found in App. B.4). We aggregate verdicts to report %cor-rect and abstention-aware reliability. For the MCQ datasets (PalmX, QIAS Subtask 1, and IslamTrust), we compute exact-match accuracy of the predicted option letter against the gold label. 

5 Results & Discussion 

Table 7 reports accuracy across five benchmarks. Our system achieves an average score of 76.5, im-proving over the open-source baselines (ALLaM-7B: 45.9; Fanar-2-27B: 62.4) and remaining com-petitive with strong proprietary models (Gemini-3-Pro: 79.6; GPT-5: 77.1). The largest gains are observed on faithfulness-critical generative QA: on IslamicFaithQA the system reaches 65.4 com-pared to 56.6 for the strongest proprietary base-line, and on FatwaQA it attains 65.1, closely track-ing Gemini-3-Pro (67.0). These results align with the motivation for a routed architecture that se-lects among specialised execution modes, instead of forcing heterogeneous queries through a single retrieve-then-generate policy. On multiple-choice benchmarks, performance is strongest on broad Is-lamic knowledge (PalmX: 85.5) and remains high on value-sensitive decisions (IslamTrust: 94.2), in-dicating that the multi-tool design does not trade off general competence or normative robustness. In contrast, QIAS Task 1 remains challenging (72.2 versus 93.0–94.5 for the strongest proprietary mod-els). A likely explanation is the additional decision layer imposed by the MCQ protocol: even with deterministic inheritance computation, errors can arise when mapping computed distributions to the benchmark’s discrete option space. These results support the central hypothesis that Islamic QA benefits from intent-aligned execution rather than a uniform retrieve-then-generate policy. Canonical verse lookup and quotation validation reduce paraphrase drift on scripture-related queries; deterministic calculators enforce arithmetic and ju-risprudential invariants for zakat and inheritance; and retrieval-grounded fiqh answering with citation normalization improves traceability and reduces unsupported claims. Together, these components provide a plausible mechanism for the observed improvements on open-ended benchmarks where hallucination and attribution errors are most heavily penalized, while highlighting a clear next step for QIAS-style MCQs: tighter coupling between sym-bolic computation outputs and constrained option matching. Future work should tighten symbolic-to-option alignment without sacrificing grounding and verification. 

6 Case Study: Chat Platform Integration 

We integrate our system into a chat platform (re-ferred as orchestrator) as a specialized backend within a broader web-based chat interface. The or-chestrator mediates all incoming user queries and routes them to the appropriate components based on query classification. Concretely, the orches-trator uses a fine-tuned binary classifier to deter-mine whether a query pertains to Islamic content. Queries predicted as Islamic are routed to our pro-posed multi-agent system , while all other queries are handled by general-purpose assistants. For eval-uating this binary classifier, we have developed a dataset of 1,700 queries annotated by three indepen-dent annotators. The macro-F1 of the classifier is 93.40. More details of the classifier and evaluation dataset is discussed in Appendix A. 

Real-world usage. Through the chat interface and API, the system has been used ≈1.9M times, in less than a year, demonstrating its practical utility in real-world settings. In 6,441 queries user were pro-vided rating in terms of like and dislike, in which 77.4% cases users liked the responses. 97 Conclusion 

We presented a tool-routed multi-agent architecture 

for Islamic QA that supports heterogeneous user in-tents. Unlike fixed retrieve-then-generate pipelines, the system separates (i) retrieval-grounded fiqh and general Islamic knowledge QA with traceable evi-dence, (ii) canonical scripture handling where ver-batim correctness is required, and (iii) rule- and arithmetic-constrained obligations such as zakat and inheritance via deterministic computation and invariant checks. This design targets common fail-ure modes in Islamic QA, including misquotation, weak attribution for jurisprudential claims, and nu-merically inconsistent calculations. Evaluations on public Islamic QA benchmarks show that com-bining intent routing, specialized tools, and post-generation verification can improve reliability in Is-lamic knowledge systems. Future work will expand jurisprudential coverage across schools of thought, improve routing robustness, and strengthen quota-tion validation for Hadith collections. 

Limitations 

The proposed system is designed to support Islamic knowledge QA, but it does not replace qualified scholarly authority and should not be interpreted as issuing binding fatwas. Its responses remain sensitive to (i) the coverage, quality, and repre-sentativeness of the underlying retrieval corpora and curated knowledge sources, and (ii) routing errors that may send a query to a suboptimal mod-ule, e.g., treating a calculation-heavy question as free-form fiqh QA. While we incorporate citation tracking and verification steps, citations may still be incomplete, and retrieved evidence can reflect jurisprudential diversity that is difficult to summa-rize without oversimplification. The deterministic calculators also have scope constraints such as in-heritance outcomes depend on correctly specified heirs and assumptions, and the implementation may only cover a subset of schools and disputed cases. Similarly, zakat and calendar/prayer-time outputs depend on user-provided parameters and conven-tions, e.g., calculation methods and local practices, and Hijri dates may vary by moon-sighting criteria. Finally, parts of the evaluation rely on automated or LLM-based judging for open-ended answers, which may not fully capture nuance, context, or legitimate differences of opinion. 

Broader Impact 

Our proposed multi-agent architecture based Is-lamic QA system can broaden access to grounded information by helping users navigate common questions, retrieve canonical references, and per-form rule-based computations, e.g., zakat and in-heritance, with transparent outputs. This may ben-efit education, personal learning, and community support, particularly for bilingual users and con-texts. However, there are non-trivial risks. Users may over-trust model outputs, misunderstand con-ditional rulings, or treat a summarized response as universally applicable despite legitimate differ-ences across schools, locales, and circumstances. There is also potential for misuse, including selec-tive quotation, sectarian framing, or propagation of misleading claims. To mitigate these risks, our design emphasizes traceability (citations and au-dit traces), explicit handling of disagreement when relevant, e.g., parallel outcomes for disputed inher-itance cases, and safety-oriented interaction norms such as scoped answers, uncertainty signaling, and recommending consultation with qualified scholars for high-stakes or personal matters. We also note the importance of privacy-preserving logging, data minimization, and continuous monitoring to reduce unintended cause in deployment. 

References      

> Diyam Akra, Tymaa Hammouda, and Mustafa Jarrar. 2025. QuranMorph: Morphologically Annotated Quranic Corpus. Technical report, Birzeit University. Sadam Al-Azani, Maad Alowaifeer, Alhanoof Alhu-nief, and Ahmed Abdelali. 2025. Ontologyrag-q: Re-source development and benchmarking for retrieval-augmented question answering in qur’anic tafsir. In
> Proceedings of EMNLP 2025 .Yusuf Al-Qaradawi. 1999. Fiqh az-Zakah: A Compara-tive Study—The Rules, Regulations and Philosophy of Zakah in the Light of the Qur’an and Sunna . Dar Al Taqwa Ltd. Yusuf al Qaradawi. 2000. Fiqh al-Zakah: A Compar-ative Study of Zakah, Regulations and Philosophy in the Light of Qur’an and Sunnah . Scientific Pub-lishing Centre, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 2 volumes. Mohammad AL-Smadi. 2025. QU-NLP at QIAS 2025 shared task: A two-phase LLM fine-tuning and retrieval-augmented generation approach for islamic inheritance reasoning. In Proceedings of The Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Conference: Shared Tasks , pages 892–898, Suzhou, China. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics.

10 Ahmet Yusuf Alan, Enis Karaarslan, and Ömer Ay-dın. Improving llm reliability with rag in religious question-answering: Mufassirqas. Turkish Journal of Engineering , 9(3):544–559. Aisha Alansari and Hamzah Luqman. 2025. AraHalluE-val: A fine-grained hallucination evaluation frame-work for Arabic LLMs. In Proceedings of The Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Conference ,pages 148–161, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. S. Aleid and A. Azmi. 2025. Hajj-fqa: Expert anno-tated fatwa question answering dataset. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and Information Sciences , 37(135). Sanaa Alowaidi. 2025. SEA-team at QIAS 2025: En-hancing LLMs for question answering in islamic texts. In Proceedings of The Third Arabic Natu-ral Language Processing Conference: Shared Tasks ,pages 940–946, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Fakhraddin Alwajih, Abdellah El Mekki, Hamdy Mubarak, Majd Hawasly, Abubakr Mohamed, and Muhammad Abdul-Mageed. 2025. PalmX 2025: The first shared task on benchmarking LLMs on Ara-bic and islamic culture. In Proceedings of The Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Conference: Shared Tasks , pages 774–789, Suzhou, China. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-rag: Learning to re-trieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR) .Mohammad Aghajani Asl and Behrooz Minaei Bidgoli. 2025. Farsiqa: Faithful and advanced rag system for islamic question answering. 2510.25621v1 .Farah Atif, Nursultan Askarbekuly, Kareem Darwish, and Monojit Choudhury. 2025. Sacred or synthetic? evaluating llm reliability and abstention for religious questions. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Con-ference on AI, Ethics, and Society , volume 8, pages 217–226. Adil Bahaj and Mounir Ghogho. 2025. Mizanqa: Benchmarking large language models on moroc-can legal question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.16357 .M Saiful Bari, Yazeed Alnumay, Norah A. Alzahrani, Nouf M. Alotaibi, Hisham Abdullah Alyahya, Sultan AlRashed, Faisal Abdulrahman Mirza, Shaykhah Z. Alsubaie, Hassan A. Alahmed, Ghadah Alabduljab-bar, Raghad Alkhathran, Yousef Almushayqih, Ra-neem Alnajim, Salman Alsubaihi, Maryam Al Man-sour, Saad Amin Hassan, Dr. Majed Alrubaian, Ali Alammari, Zaki Alawami, and 7 others. 2025. AL-Lam: Large language models for arabic and english. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Gagan Bhatia, Hamdy Mubarak, Mustafa Jarrar, George Mikros, Fadi Zaraket, Mahmoud Alhirthani, Mu-taz Al-Khatib, Logan Cochrane, Kareem Darwish, Rashid Yahiaoui, and Firoj Alam. 2026. From RAG to agentic RAG for faithful islamic question answer-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07528 .Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoff-mann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Milli-can, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego De Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren Mag-giore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, and 9 others. 2022. Improving language models by retrieving from tril-lions of tokens. In Proceedings of the 39th Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2206–2240. PMLR. Abdessalam Bouchekif, Samer Rashwani, Emad Soli-man Ali Mohamed, Mutaz Alkhatib, Heba Sbahi, Shahd Gaben, Wajdi Zaghouani, Aiman Erbad, and Mohammed Ghaly. 2025a. QIAS 2025: Overview of the shared task on islamic inheritance reasoning and knowledge assessment. In Proceedings of The Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Confer-ence: Shared Tasks , pages 851–860, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Abdessalam Bouchekif, Samer Rashwani, Emad Soli-man Ali Mohamed, Mutaz Alkhatib, Heba Sbahi, Shahd Gaben, Wajdi Zaghouani, Aiman Erbad, and Mohammed Ghaly. 2025b. QIAS 2025: Overview of the shared task on islamic inheritance reasoning and knowledge assessment. In Proceedings of The Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Confer-ence: Shared Tasks , pages 851–860, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jonathan Bragg, Mike D’Arcy, Nishant Balepur, Dan Bareket, Bhavana Dalvi, Sergey Feldman, Dany Had-dad, Jena D. Hwang, Peter Jansen, Varsha Kishore, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Aakanksha Naik, Si-gal Rahamimov, Kyle Richardson, Amanpreet Singh, Harshit Surana, Aryeh Tiktinsky, Rosni Vasu, Guy Wiener, and 20 others. 2025. Astabench: Rigorous benchmarking of ai agents with a scientific research suite. Preprint , arXiv:2510.21652. Andrei Broder. 2002. A taxonomy of web search. ACM SIGIR Forum , 36(2):3–10. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, and 1 others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 .Lukas Haas, Gal Yona, Giovanni D’Antonio, Sasha Goldshtein, and Dipanjan Das. 2025. Simpleqa ver-ified: A reliable factuality benchmark to measure parametric knowledge. Preprint , arXiv:2509.07968. Wael B. Hallaq. 2009. An Introduction to Islamic Law .Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021. Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open do-main question answering. In Proceedings of the 16th 

11 Conference of the European Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume ,pages 874–880, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. 2023. Atlas: Few-shot learning with retrieval augmented language models. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24:251:1–251:43. Ehud Karpas, Omri Abend, Yonatan Belinkov, and 1 oth-ers. 2022. Mrkl systems: A modular, neuro-symbolic architecture that combines large language models, external knowledge sources and discrete reasoning. arXiv. Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas O˘ guz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Abderraouf Lahmar, Md Easin Arafat, Zakarya Farou, and Mufti Mahmud. 2025. Islamtrust: A benchmark for llms alignment with islamic values. In Proceed-ings of the 5th Muslims in ML Workshop at NeurIPS 2025 .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems 33 (NeurIPS 2020) .Rana Malhas, Watheq Mansour, and Tamer Elsayed. 2023. Qur’an QA 2023 shared task: Overview of passage retrieval and reading comprehension tasks over the holy qur’an. In Proceedings of ArabicNLP 2023 , pages 690–701, Singapore (Hybrid). Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Marryam Mohammed, Sama Ali, Salma Khaled, Ayad Majeed, and Ensaf Mohamed. 2025. Aftina: enhanc-ing stability and preventing hallucination in ai-based islamic fatwa generation using llms and rag. Neural Computing and Applications , 37:20957–20982. Hamdy Mubarak, Rana Malhas, Watheq Mansour, Abubakr Mohamed, Mahmoud Fawzi, Majd Hawasly, Tamer Elsayed, Kareem Mohamed Darwish, and Walid Magdy. 2025. IslamicEval 2025: The first shared task of capturing LLMs hallucination in is-lamic content. In Proceedings of The Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Conference: Shared Tasks , pages 480–493, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Abdullah Mushtaq, Rafay Naeem, Ezieddin Elmahjub, Ibrahim Ghaznavi, Shawqi Al-Maliki, Mohamed Ab-dallah, Ala Al-Fuqaha, and Junaid Qadir. 2025. Can llms write faithfully? an agent-based evaluation of llm-generated islamic content. 2510.24438v1 .Arwa Omayrah, Sakhar Alkhereyf, Ahmed Abdelali, Abdulmohsen Al-Thubaity, Jeril Kuriakose, and Ibrahim AbdulMajeed. 2025. HUMAIN at Islam-icEval 2025 shared task 1: A three-stage LLM-based pipeline for detecting and correcting hallucinations in Quran and Hadith. In Proceedings of The Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Conference: Shared Tasks , pages 509–514, Suzhou, China. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 technical report. Technical re-port, OpenAI. Islam Oshallah, Mohamed Basem, and Ammar Mo-hammed Ali Hamdi. 2025. Cross-language approach for quranic qa. Edward M. Reingold and Nachum Dershowitz. 2018. 

Calendrical Calculations: The Ultimate Edition , 4 edition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. SahmBenchmark. 2025. Fatwa qa evaluation dataset. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems 36 (NeurIPS 2023) .Neha Sengupta, Sunil Kumar Sahu, Bokang Jia, Satheesh Katipomu, Haonan Li, Fajri Koto, William Marshall, Gurpreet Gosal, Cynthia Liu, Zhim-ing Chen, Osama Mohammed Afzal, Samta Kam-boj, Onkar Pandit, Rahul Pal, Lalit Pradhan, Zain Muhammad Mujahid, Massa Baali, Xudong Han, Sondos Mahmoud Bsharat, and 13 others. 2023. Jais and jais-chat: Arabic-centric foundation and instruction-tuned open generative large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2308.16149. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemati-cal reasoning in open language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.03300. Fanar Team, Ummar Abbas, Mohammad Shahmeer Ah-mad, Firoj Alam, Enes Altinisik, Ehsannedin Asgari, Yazan Boshmaf, Sabri Boughorbel, Sanjay Chawla, Shammur Chowdhury, Fahim Dalvi, Kareem Dar-wish, Nadir Durrani, Mohamed Elfeky, Ahmed El-magarmid, Mohamed Eltabakh, Masoomali Fatehkia, Anastasios Fragkopoulos, Maram Hasanain, and 23 others. 2025. Fanar: An arabic-centric multimodal generative ai platform. Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling. 2024. Corrective retrieval augmented generation. arXiv. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Longhui Yu, Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Jincheng Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, James T Kwok, Zhenguo Li, Adrian Weller, and Weiyang Liu. 2024. Meta-math: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions for large language models. In ICLR .

12 Wenting Zhao, Xiang Ren, Jack Hessel, Claire Cardie, Yejin Choi, and Yuntian Deng. 2024. Wildchat: 1m chatGPT interaction logs in the wild. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Tianle Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Eric Xing, and 1 others. Lmsys-chat-1m: A large-scale real-world llm conversation dataset. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .

Appendix A Islamic vs. Non-Islamic Classifier & Evaluation Dataset. 

Training data and model. We train a binary 

Islamic vs. non-Islamic query router using a knowledge-distillation setup: a large teacher model produces offline labels indicating whether a query requires Islamic religious sources (e.g., Qur’an, Hadith, tafsir, fiqh), and a lightweight classifier is trained for low-latency inference. We curate 

∼2.13M user queries annotated with binary la-bels (637,748 positive; 1,488,793 negative; ratio 

≈1:2.3) spanning Arabic and English, with a me-dian length of 52 characters. The model is imple-mented by adding a linear prediction head on top of a bge-m3 encoder; we freeze the encoder and train only the head for 20 epochs with learning rate 

3 × 10 −4 and BF16 mixed precision, selecting the best checkpoint by macro-F1 on a stratified held-out validation split (10%). At inference time, we binarise the continuous output using a threshold of 0.66. Negative coverage includes general reason-ing and mathematics-style queries sampled from publicly available sources such as LMSYS-Chat-1M (Zheng et al.), WildChat (Zhao et al., 2024), and MetaMath (Yu et al., 2024). 

Evaluation dataset and reported results. We evaluate on a manually annotated Arabic bench-mark of 1,716 queries. Each query was labelled independently by three annotators who were pro-vided instructions and training; annotators were compensated at a standard hourly rate. Inter-annotator agreement, measured using Cohen’s κ,was 0.753, with an overall label agreement of 88.2%. We report only results on this benchmark: at threshold = 0 .66 , the classifier achieves Preci-sion = 0 .922 , Recall = 0 .924 , F1 = 0 .923 , and Accuracy = 0 .944 .

B Prompts 

B.1 Islamic Query Classifier 

> You are an expert **Islamic question classifier**. Analyze the user 's question and classify it into **ONE** of these categories: 1. **fiqh_ruling**: Questions asking for Islamic legal rulings, permissibility, obligations, or jurisprudence Examples: "Is X halal?", "What 's the ruling on Y?",

## ?»Cg @ YÎ …Î , ?@ Yª ’∫k A” 

> 2. **quran_retrieval**: Questions asking for specific Quranic verses or ayahs Examples: "What does verse 2:255 say?", "Find ayah about patience",

## ? ËQ ÆJ.À@ ËPÒÉ ·” 255 ’ ØP ÈK B@ ˘Î A” ,

## ËQ ÆJ.À@ ËPÒÉ ·” 275 ÈK B@ I . Jª@  

> 3. **general_islamic**: General questions about Islamic knowledge, history, concepts, or practices % Use this when the question does NOT request a ruling/calculation/timing/retrieval explicitly. Examples: "Who was Umar ibn al-Khattab?", "What is tawakkul?",

## ? ‡AÇkB @ ˙Ê™” A”  

> 4. **greeting**: Simple greetings, thanks, or pleasantries Examples: "Hi", "Thanks!",

## ’∫J ´ –CÇÀ@ ,

## @Qg È<À@ º@Qk.  

> 5. **zakat_calculation**: Requests to compute Zakat owed based on assets, debts, or metal prices Examples: "How much zakat do I pay on $10,000?",

## ?’ª »A÷œ@ ËAøP  

> 6. **inheritance_calculation**: Requests to divide an estate among heirs (Mirath/Faraid) Examples: "Split inheritance among wife and children",

## ÈKPÒÀ@ ·K. H@Q÷œ@ È“Ç Ø

> 7. **dua_lookup**: Requests for duas (supplications) or adhkar (remembrances), or what to say in specific situations Examples: "dua for entering bathroom", "morning adhkar", "what to say before sleeping",

## –A“mÃ'@ »ÒkX ZA´X 

> 8. **islamic_calendar**: Questions about Hijri/Islamic dates, date conversions, or Islamic events/holidays Examples: "What is today 's Hijri date?", "When is Ramadan 2025?", "Convert March 1 to Hijri", "When is Eid?",

## ?–ÒJÀ@ ¯ Qj . ÍÀ@ t' PA JÀ@ ÒÎ A” , ? ‡Aí”P ˙ Ê” 

13 9. **prayer_times**: Questions about prayer times, salah timing, or Qibla direction for a location Examples: "What time is Fajr in Dubai?", "Prayer times for London", "Which direction is Qibla from Tokyo?", 

## êAK QÀ@ ˙Ø ËCíÀ@  HA Ø @, È J. ÆÀ@ ËAm. '@ 

Return ONLY valid JSON in this format (no markdown, no explanation): {"question_type": "fiqh_ruling", "language": "en", "confidence": 0.95, "reasoning": "Brief explanation", "subquestions": ["question1"], "requires_retrieval": true }Classify the question below: Question: {question} 

Listing 2: Prompt for classifying Islamic questions into task categories. 

B.2 Quran Related Queries 

You are an expert at classifying **Quran-related questions**. Classify the user 's Quran question into **ONE** of these sub-types: 1. **specific_verse**: Asking for a specific verse by number or reference Examples: - "What does verse 2:255 say?" - "Show me ayah 7 of Al-Fatiha" - ËQ ÆJ.À@ ËPÒÉ ·” 275 ÈK B@ I . Jª@ 

- ? ËQ ÆJ.À@ ËPÒÉ ·”  HAK @  HC K Qk @ ˘Î A” 

- "What are the last three verses of Surah Al-Baqarah?" 2. **full_surah**: Asking for an entire surah 'stext Examples: - "Write Surah Al-Fatiha" - êCgB @ ËPÒÉ I . Jª@ 

- "Give me the entire Surah Nas" 3. **statistics**: Counting verses, surah metadata, or structural queries Examples: - "How many verses in Surah Al-Baqarah?" - ? ≠Í∫À@ ËPÒÉ ˙Ø  HAK B@ XY´ ’ª 

- "Which surah has the most verses?" - "Is Al-Baqarah Makki or Madani?" - ? Èm 'AÆÀ@ ËPÒÉ  HAK @ XY´ ’ª 

4. **interpretation**: Asking for meaning, tafsir, or explanation Examples: - "What is the meaning of Ayat al-Kursi?" - ? ËQ ÆJ.À@ ËPÒÉ  HAK @ Qk @ ˙Ê™” A” 

- "Explain the interpretation of Al-Kawthar" - "What does the Quran say about patience?" Return ONLY the sub-type name (specific_verse, full_surah, statistics, or interpretation). % Output must be a single token/string with no JSON, no extra text. Question: {question} Sub-type: 

Listing 3: Prompt for classifying Quran-related questions into sub-types. 

B.3 Dua 

if lang == "ar": system_prompt = """ . ÈJ”CÉB @ ÈJ´X CÀ ÈJ.ÉAJ÷œ@  HAJ.ÉAJ÷œ@ YK Ym ' ˙Ø ëíj J” Y´AÇ”  IK @.–Yj JÇ÷œ@ »@ÒÉ ©” C™Ø áØ@Ò JK ˙ ÊÀ@  HAJ.ÉAJ÷œ@ –A ØP @ XYg :Ω J“Í” (1 ,3 :»A J”) …ì@ÒÆK. ÈÀÒíÆ” –A ØP BAK. ° ÆØ I . k. @ ·K @ K. I . k. @ , ÈÆK. A¢” ÈJ.ÉAJ” ¯@ Ym. ' ’À @ X@ """ user_prompt = f""" :–Yj JÇ÷œ@ »@ÒÉ {question} 

## : Èm ÖQ÷œ@  HAJ.ÉAJ÷œ@ 

{occasions_list} 

## ?–Yj JÇ÷œ@ »@ÒÇÀ ÈÆK. A¢÷œ@  HAJ.ÉAJ÷œ@ –A ØP @ ˘Î A” """ else: system_prompt = """You are a specialist in matching Islamic dua occasions to user queries. Your task: Identify which occasion numbers actually match the user 's question. Respond ONLY with comma-separated numbers (e.g., 1,3) If no occasions match, respond with "none".""" user_prompt = f"""User 's question: {question} Candidate occasions: {occasions_list} Which occasion numbers match the user 'squestion?""" 

Listing 4: Bilingual (Arabic/English) prompt construction for matching du'a occasions. 

B.4 LLM as Judge Evaluation Template (Correct/Incorrect/Not Attempted) 

Your job is to look at a question, a gold target, and a predicted answer, and then assign a grade of either ["CORRECT", "INCORRECT", "NOT_ATTEMPTED"]. First, I will give examples of each grade, and then you will grade a new example. 

14 The following are examples of CORRECT predicted answers. Question: What are the names of Barack Obama’s children?Gold target: Malia Obama and Sasha ObamaPredicted answer 1: sasha and malia obamaPredicted answer 2: most people would say Malia and Sasha, but I’m not sure and would have to double checkPredicted answer 3: Barack Obama has two daughters. Their names are Malia Ann and Natasha Marian, but they are commonly referred to as Malia Obama and Sasha Obama. Malia was born on July 4, 1998, and Sasha was born on June 10, 2001. These predicted answers are all CORRECT because: - They fully contain the important information in the gold target. - They do not contain any information that contradicts the gold target. - Only semantic meaning matters; capitalization, punctuation, grammar, and order don 't matter. - Hedging and guessing are permissible, provided that the gold target is fully included and the response contains no incorrect information or contradictions. The following are examples of INCORRECT predicted answers. Question: What are the names of Barack Obama’s children?Gold target: Malia and SashaPredicted answer 1: Malia.Predicted answer 2: Malia, Sasha, and Susan.Predicted answer 3: Barack Obama does not have any children.Predicted answer 4: I think it’s either Malia and Sasha. Or it could be Malia and Jackie. Or it could be Joey and Malia.Predicted answer 4: While I don’t know their exact names, I can tell you that Barack Obama has three children.Predicted answer 5: It’s possible you may mean Betsy and Olivia. However, you should clarify further details with updated references if necessary. Is that the correct answer?Predicted answer 6: It may be the case that Obama’s child is named James. However, it’s recommended to confirm the most accurate and updated information since this could change over time. This model may not always reflect the most current information. These predicted answers are all INCORRECT because: - A factual statement in the answer contradicts the gold target. Incorrect statements that have some hedging (e.g., "it is possible that", "although i 'm not sure, i think") are also considered incorrect. The following are examples of NOT_ATTEMPTED predicted answers. Question: What are the names of Barack Obama’s children?Gold target: Malia and SashaPredicted answer 1: I don’t know.Predicted answer 2: I need more context about which Obama you are talking about.Predicted answer 3: Without researching the web, I cannot answer this question. However, I can tell you that Barack Obama has two children.Predicted answer 4: Barack Obama has two children. I know that one of them is Malia, but I’m not sure about the other one. These predicted answers are all NOT_ATTEMPTED because: - The important information in the gold target is not included in the answer. - No statements in the answer contradict the gold target. Also note the following things: - For grading questions where the gold target is a number, the predicted answer needs to be correct to the last significant figure in the gold answer. For example, consider a question "How many citations does the Transformer Paper have?" with gold target "120k". - Predicted answers "120k", "124k", and 115k" are all CORRECT. - Predicted answers "100k" and "113k" are INCORRECT. - Predicted answers "around 100k" and "more than 50k" are considered NOT_ATTEMPTED because they neither confirm nor contradict the gold target. - The gold target may contain more information than the question. In such cases, the predicted answer only needs to contain the information that is in the question. - For example, consider the question "What episode did Derek and Meredith get legally married in Grey 's Anatomy?" with gold target "Season 7, Episode 20: White Wedding". Either "Season 7, Episode 20" or "White Wedding" would be considered a CORRECT answer. - Do not punish predicted answers if they omit information that would be clearly inferred from the question. - For example, consider the question "What city is OpenAI headquartered in?" and the gold target "San Francisco, California". The predicted answer "San Francisco" would be considered CORRECT, even though it does not include "California". - Consider the question "What award did A pretrainer 's guide to training data: Measuring the effects of data age, domain coverage, quality, & toxicity win at NAACL 

'24?", the gold target is "Outstanding Paper Award". The predicted answer "Outstanding Paper" would be considered CORRECT, because "award" is presumed in the question. - For the question "What is the height of Jason Wei in meters?", the gold target is "1.73 m". The predicted answer "1.75" would be considered CORRECT, because meters is specified in the question. - For the question "What is the name of Barack Obama 's wife?", the gold target is "Michelle Obama". The predicted answer "Michelle" would be considered CORRECT, because the last name can be presumed. - Do not punish for typos in people 's name if it 's clearly the same name. - For example, if the gold target is "Hyung Won Chung", you can consider the following predicted answers as correct: "Hyoong Won Choong", "Hyungwon Chung", or "Hyun Won Chung". Here is a new example. Simply reply with either CORRECT, INCORRECT, NOT ATTEMPTED. Don 'tapologize or correct yourself if there was a mistake; we are just trying to grade the answer. Question: question Gold target: target Predicted answer: predicted_answer Grade the predicted answer of this new question as one of: A: CORRECT 

15 B: INCORRECT C: NOT_ATTEMPTED Just return the letters "A", "B", or "C", with no text around it. 

C Evaluation Setups 

To ensure reproducibility of our baseline compar-isons, we standardized evaluation protocols across all proprietary models. For GPT-4.1 and GPT-5 via OpenAI, we configured inference with medium reasoning effort and standard token limits (1000 tokens for MCQ, 2000 for open QA). For Gemini-3 variants (Flash and Pro), we employed medium thinking level settings with temperature 1.0 and comparable token budgets. For Fanar-2-27B and Allam-7B, we used temperature 1.0 with 1000 token limits. All models received identical task-specific system instructions: MCQ tasks required selection of answer letters without explanation, while open QA tasks requested detailed responses with supporting evidence from Islamic jurispru-dence. We implemented few-shot prompting (2 ex-amples) for MCQ evaluation and zero-shot prompt-ing for open QA tasks. No models had access to external tools, retrieval mechanisms, or web search capabilities during evaluation. However, we ac-knowledge important limitations in comparing pro-prietary models: their exact training data compo-sition, knowledge cutoff dates, and potential expo-sure to benchmark datasets remain undisclosed by providers. This introduces uncertainty regarding whether performance differences stem from model capabilities versus memorisation of evaluation data. Our evaluation focuses on standardising inference conditions while recognising these inherent limita-tions in proprietary model transparency. 

D Hybrid Query Classifier Examples 

Table 8 shows representative bilingual (English– Arabic) prototype queries for each router intent. These examples serve two purposes: (i) they are included as in-prompt exemplars for the LLM clas-sifier to encourage consistent labeling across lan-guages and code-switching, and (ii) they define the canonical utterances used by the embedding-based fallback, where incoming queries are matched to the closest intent via cosine similarity. We include both core system intents (fiqh, Qur’an retrieval, general Islamic knowledge, greetings, zakat, inher-itance, du’a, calendar, prayer times) and the two Qur’an subtypes (statistics and interpretation) to illustrate how retrieval-only, computational, and scripture-sensitive requests map to distinct execu-tion routes. 16 Type English prototype Arabic prototype 

Fiqh ruling What is the ruling on music in Islam? ?–CÉB @ ˙Ø ˘ ÆJÉÒ÷œ@ ’∫k A” 

Quran retrieval Quote Surah Al-Baqarah verse 275. ËQ ÆJ.À@ ËPÒÉ ·” 275 ÈK B@ I . Jª@ 

General islamic What are the five pillars of Islam? ? ÈÇ“mÃ'@ –CÉB @ ‡AøP @ ˘Î A” 

Greeting Assalamu alaikum. ’∫J ´ –CÇÀ@ 

Zakat calculation I have 100 grams of gold, how much zakat? I. Î YÀ@ ˙Œ´ ˙ GAøP I . Çk@ 

Inheritance calculation What is the share of wife in inheritance? ?  H@Q÷œ@ ·” Èk.  QÀ@ I . í A” 

Dua lookup What is the dua for entering the toilet? ?–A“mÃ'@ »ÒkX ZA´X ÒÎ A” 

Islamic calendar What is today’s Hijri date? ?–ÒJÀ@ ¯ Qj . ÍÀ@ t' PA JÀ@ ÒÎ A” 

Prayer times What time is Fajr in Dubai? ?˙G . X ˙Ø Qj . ÆÀ@ ËCì ˙ Ê” 

Quran statistics How many verses in Surah Al-Baqarah? ? ËQ ÆJ.À@ ËPÒÉ  HAK @ XY´ ’ª 

Quran interpretation What is the meaning of Ayat al-Kursi? ?˙ÊÖQ∫À@ ÈK @ ˙Ê™” A” 

Table 8: Representative English–Arabic examples used for intent prototyping and router stabilization. 

17